Asthma

Asthma is a disease characterized by episodic airway obstruction
and airway hyperresponsiveness usually accompanied by airway
inflammation. In most cases, the airway obstruction is reversible, but
in a subset of asthmatics, a component of the obstruction may
become irreversible. In a large proportion of patients, the airway
inflammation is eosinophilic, but some patients may present with
differing types of airway inflammation, and in some cases, there is
no obvious evidence of airway inflammation.

MANIFESTATIONS
Asthma most frequently presents as episodic shortness of breath,
wheezing, and cough, which can occur in relation to triggers but may
also occur spontaneously. These symptoms can occur in
combination or separately. Other symptoms can include chest
tightness and/or mucus production. These symptoms can resolve
spontaneously or with therapy. In some patients, wheezing and/or
dyspnea can be persistent. Episodes of acute bronchospasm, known
as exacerbations, may be severe enough to require emergency
medical care or hospitalization and may result in death.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Asthma is the most common chronic disease associated with
significant morbidity and mortality, with ∼241 million people affected
globally. Cross-sectional studies suggest that 7.9% of the population
in the United States suffers from asthma as compared to ∼4.3%
prevalence worldwide. Prevalence continues to increase (starting at
7.3% in 2001 in the United States) and is associated with transition
from rural to urban living. Asthma is more prevalent among children
(8.4%) than adults (7.7%). In children, the prevalence is greatest
among boys (2:1 male-to-female ratio), with a trend toward greater
prevalence in women in adulthood. In some patients, asthma
resolves as they enter adulthood only to “recur” later in life.
In the United States in 2016, 1.8 million people visited an
emergency department for asthma, and 189,000 were hospitalized.
The total economic cost in the United States in 2007 was estimated
at $56 billion. In the United States, asthma is more prevalent in
blacks than Caucasians, and black race is associated with greater
case morbidity. The ethnicity with the greatest prevalence in the
United States is the Puerto Rican population.
Asthma mortality increased worldwide in the 1960s, apparently
related to overuse of inhaled β2-agonists. Reduction in mortality
since then has been attributed to increased use of inhaled
corticosteroids. Asthma mortality declined globally from 0.44 per
100,000 people in 1993 to 0.19 in 2006, but further reduction in
mortality has not occurred since that time.

THE PATHWAY TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF ASTHMA
The pathway to development of asthma can be varied. As illustrated
in Fig. 287-1, there is an interplay between genetic susceptibility
(see below) and environmental exposure and endogenous
developmental factors (e.g., aging and menopause [see “Etiologic
Mechanisms and Risk Factors” and Table 287-1]) that can lead to
the development of asthma. Continued or additional exposures and
triggers (Table 287-2) can affect the progression of disease and the
degree of impairment.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ MECHANISMS LEADING TO ACUTE AND CHRONIC AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION

The pathobiologic processes in the airways that lead to episodic and
chronic airway obstruction of asthma are discussed below. Their
pathologic correlates are highlighted in Fig. 287-2, illustrating the
pathologic changes that can occur in asthmatic airways. These
processes can occur individually or simultaneously. There can be
temporal variation of these processes in an individual based on
exogenous factors, discussed later in this chapter, as well as the
aging process itself. These processes can involve the entire airway
(but not the parenchyma), but there can be significant spatial
heterogeneity, as has now been demonstrated using hyperpolarized
gas ventilation studies and high-resolution computed tomography
(CT) of the thorax.

Airway Hyperresponsiveness 
Airway hyperresponsiveness is a hallmark of asthma. It is defined as an acute narrowing response of
the airways in reaction to agents that do not elicit airway responses
in nonaffected individuals or an excess narrowing response to
inhaled agents as compared to that which would occur in
nonaffected individuals. A component of the hyperresponsiveness
occurs at the level of the airway smooth muscle itself as
demonstrated by hyperresponsiveness to direct smooth-muscle–
acting agents such as histamine or methacholine. In many patients,
the apparent hyperresponsiveness is due to indirect activation of
airway narrowing mechanisms as a result of stimulation of
inflammatory cells (which release direct bronchoconstrictors and
mediators that cause airway edema and/or mucus secretion) and/or
stimulation of sensory nerves that can act on the smooth muscle or
inflammatory cells. Agents and physical stimuli that elicit such
responses are discussed later.
The apparent increased responsiveness of the airways in asthma
may also have a structural etiology. In asthma, airway wall thickness
is associated with disease severity and duration. This thickening,
which may result from a combination of smooth-muscle hypertrophy
and hyperplasia, subepithelial collagen deposition, airway edema,
and mucosal inflammation, can result in a tendency for the airway to
narrow disproportionately in response to stimuli that elicit increased
airway muscle tension. A major therapeutic objective in asthma is to
decrease the degree of airway hyperresponsiveness.

Inflammatory Cells 
While airway inflammation can be precipitated
by acute exposure to inhalants, most asthmatics have evidence of
chronic inflammation in the airways. Most commonly, this
inflammation is eosinophilic in nature. In some patients, neutrophilic
inflammation may be predominant, especially in those with more
severe asthma. Mast cells are also more frequent. Many
inflammatory cells are present in an activated state, as will be
discussed in the section on inflammation.

Airway Smooth Muscle Airway smooth muscle can contribute to
asthma in three ways. First, it can be hyperresponsive to stimuli, as
noted above. Second, hypertrophy and hyperplasia can lead to
airway wall thickening with consequences for hyperresponsiveness,
as noted above. Lastly, airway smooth-muscle cells can produce
chemokines and cytokines that promote airway inflammation and
promote the survival of inflammatory cells, particularly mast cells.

Subepithelial Collagen Deposition and Matrix Deposition
Thickening of the subepithelial basement membrane occurs as a
result of deposition of repair-type collagens and tenascin, periostin,
fibronectin, and osteopontin primarily from myofibroblasts under the
epithelium. The deposition of collagen and matrix stiffens the airway
and can result in exaggerated responses to increased
circumferential tension exerted by the smooth muscle. Such
deposition can also narrow the airway lumen and decrease its ability
to relax and thus can contribute to chronic airway obstruction.

Airway Epithelium Airway epithelium disruption takes the form of
separation of columnar cells from the basal cells. The damaged
epithelium is hypothesized to form a trophic unit with the underlying
mesenchyme. This unit elaborates multiple growth factors thought to
contribute to airway remodeling as well as multiple cytokines and
mediators that promote asthmatic airway inflammation.

Vascular Proliferation In a subset of asthmatics, there is a
significant degree of angiogenesis thought to be secondary to
elaboration of angiogenic factors in the context of airway
inflammation. Inflammatory mediators can result in leakage from
postcapillary venules, which can contribute to the acute and chronic
edema of the airways.

Airway Edema Submucosal edema can be present as an acute
response in asthma and as a chronic contributor to airway wall
thickening.

Epithelial Goblet Cell Metaplasia and Mucus Hypersecretion
Chronic inflammation can result in the appearance and proliferation
of mucus cells. Increased mucus production can reduce the effective
airway luminal area. Mucus plugs can obstruct medium-size airways
and can extend into the small airways.

Neuronal Proliferation Neurotrophins, which can lead to neuronal
proliferation, are elaborated by smooth-muscle cells, epithelial cells,
and inflammatory cells. Neuronal inputs can regulate smooth-muscle
tone and mucus production, which may mediate acute
bronchospasm and potentially chronically increased airway tone.

■ Airway Inflammation (Type 2 and Non–Type 2 Inflammation)
Most asthma is accompanied by airway inflammation. In the past,
asthma had been divided into atopic and nonatopic (or intrinsic)
asthma. The former was identified as relating to allergen sensitivity
and exposure, with production of IgE, and occurring more commonly
in children. The latter was identified as occurring in individuals with
later onset asthma, with or without allergies, but frequently with
eosinophilia. This paradigm is being superseded by a nosology that
favors consideration of whether asthma is associated with type 2 or
non–type 2 inflammation. This approach to immunologic
classification is driven by a developing understanding of the
underlying immune processes and by the development of
therapeutic approaches that target type 2 inflammation (see later
sections on asthma therapy).

Type 2 Inflammation 
Type 2 inflammation is an immune response
involving the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system to
promote barrier immunity on mucosal surfaces. It is called type 2
because it is associated with the type 2 subset of CD4+ T-helper
cells, which produce the cytokines interleukin (IL) 4, IL-5, and IL-13.
As shown in Fig. 287-3, these cytokines can have pleiotropic effects.
IL-4 induces B-cell isotype switching to production of IgE. IgE,
through its binding to basophils and mast cells, results in
environmental sensitivity to allergens as a result of cross-linking of
IgE on the surface of these mast cells and basophils. The products
released from these cells include type 2 cytokines as well as direct
activators of smooth-muscle constriction and edema. IL-5 has a
critical role in regulating eosinophils. It controls formation,
recruitment, and survival of these cells. IL-13 induces airway
hyperresponsiveness, mucus hypersecretion, and goblet cell
metaplasia. While allergen exposure in allergic individuals can elicit
a cascade of activation of type 2 inflammation, it is now understood
(see Fig. 287-3) that nonallergic stimuli can elicit production of type 2
cytokines, particularly due to stimulation of type 2 innate lymphoid
cells (ILC2). These cells can produce IL-5 and IL-13. ILC2s can be
activated by epithelial cytokines known as alarmins, which are
produced in response to “nonallergic” epithelial exposures such as
irritants, pollutants, oxidative agents, fungi, or viruses. Thus, these
“nonallergic” stimuli can be associated with eosinophilia.

The development of anti–IL-5 drugs that dramatically reduce
eosinophils has allowed us to determine that, in many asthmatics,
eosinophils play a major role in asthma pathobiology. They may
induce hyperresponsiveness through release of oxidative radicals
and major basic protein, which can disrupt the epithelium. In
addition, recent CT imaging has suggested that mucus plugs, which
may contain significant amounts of eosinophil aggregates, may
accumulate in the airways and contribute to asthma severity.

Non–Type 2 Processes 
As shown in Fig. 287-2, multiple processes
can contribute to airway narrowing and apparent airway
hyperresponsiveness. While type 2 inflammatory processes are most
common, non–type 2 processes can exist either in combination with
type 2 inflammation or without type 2 inflammation. Neutrophilic
inflammation, as shown in Fig. 287-3, can also occur. This type of
inflammation is more commonly seen in severe asthma that has not
responded to the common anti-inflammatory therapies, such as
corticosteroids, that usually suppress type 2 inflammation. In some
cases, it may also be associated with chronic infection, occasionally
with atypical pathogens such as Mycoplasma, perhaps accounting
for the response of some of these patients to macrolide antibiotics. It
is also commonly seen in reactive airway dysfunction syndrome (see
“Etiologic Mechanisms and Risk Factors”).
In a small subset of asthmatics, the pathologic changes seen in
Fig. 287-2 may occur without any evidence of tissue infiltration by
inflammatory cells. The etiology of such pauci-granulocytic asthma is
unclear.

■ Mediators
Many chemical substances or signaling factors can contribute to the
pathobiologic picture of asthma. Some of them have been
successfully targeted in developing asthma therapies.

Cytokines As illustrated in Fig. 287-3, and as discussed above, IL-4,
IL-5, and IL-13 are the major cytokines associated with type 2
inflammation. They have all been targeted successfully in asthma
therapies. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), IL-25, and IL-33
also play a role in the signaling cascade and are being actively
studied as targets for treatment of asthma. IL-9 has been implicated
as well. IL-6, IL-17, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), IL-1β, and IL-8
have been implicated in non–type 2 inflammation.

Fatty Acid Mediators Proinflammatory mediators derived from
arachidonic acid include leukotrienes and prostaglandins. The
cysteinyl leukotrienes (leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4) are produced by
eosinophils and mast cells. They are potent smooth-muscle
constrictors. They also stimulate mucus secretion, recruit allergic
inflammatory cells, cause microvascular leakage, modulate cytokine
production, and influence neural transmission. Cysteinyl leukotriene
modifiers have shown clinical benefit in asthma. The non-cysteinyl
leukotriene, LTB4, is produced primarily from neutrophils but can also
be synthesized by macrophages and epithelial cells. It is a potent
neutrophil chemoattractant. Prostaglandins are for the most part
proinflammatory. Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) is produced by mast cells.
Receptors for PGD2 (CRTH2 receptors) are present on TH2 cells,
ILC2 cells, mast cells, eosinophils, macrophages, and epithelial
cells, and the activation of these receptors upregulates type 2
inflammation. Initial studies with drugs blocking CRTH2 have shown
mild to moderate effectiveness in asthma.
There are several classes of fatty acid–derived mediators that are
responsible for the resolution of inflammation. These include the
resolvins and lipoxins. Several studies suggest that deficiencies in
these moieties may be responsible for the ongoing inflammation in
asthma, especially in severe asthma.

Nitric Oxide Nitric oxide is a potent vasodilator, and in vitro studies
suggest that it can increase mucus production and smooth-muscle
proliferation. It is produced by epithelial cells, especially in response
to IL-13, and by stimulated inflammatory cells including eosinophils,
mast cells, and neutrophils. Its precise role in the asthmatic diathesis
is unclear. However, its production is increased in the airways in the
presence of asthmatic eosinophilic inflammation, and it can be
detected in exhaled breath.

Reactive Oxygen Species When allergens, pollutants, bacteria, and
viruses activate inflammatory cells in the airway, they induce
respiratory bursts that release reactive oxygen species that result in
oxidative stress in the surrounding tissue. Increases in oxidative
stress have been shown to affect smooth-muscle contraction,
increase mucus secretion, produce airway hyperresponsiveness,
and result in epithelial shedding.

Chemokines A variety of chemokines are secreted by the epithelium
(as well as other inflammatory cells) and attract inflammatory cells
into the airways. Those of particular interest include eotaxin (an
eosinophil chemoattractant), TARC and MDC (which attract TH2
cells), and RANTES (which has pluripotent pro-phlogistic effects).

ETIOLOGIC MECHANISMS, RISK FACTORS, TRIGGERS, AND COMPLICATING COMORBIDITIES
As illustrated in Fig. 287-1, the development of asthma involves an
interplay between risk factors and exposures (see Table 287-1) and
genetic predisposition.
■ HERITABLE PREDISPOSITION
Asthma has a strong genetic predisposition. Family and twin studies
suggest a 25–80% degree of heritability. Genetic studies suggest
complex polygenic inheritance complicated by interaction with
environmental exposures. Further, epigenetic modifications related
to environmental exposures may also produce heritable patterns of
asthma. Many of the genes related to asthma have been associated
with risk for atopy. However, there appear to be genetic modifications
that predispose to asthma and its severity. Association studies have
identified multiple candidate genes. In many cases, these genes vary
from population to population. The most consistently identified
include ORMDL3/GSDMB (in the 17q21 chromosomal region),
ADAM33, DPP-10, TSLP, IL-12, IL-33, ST2, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DQB2,
TLR1, and IL6R. In many cases, association studies have identified
polymorphisms in noncoding regions of the genome, suggesting that
the majority of the currently identified traits act as “enhancers” of
biologic processes.
Genetic polymorphisms have also been associated with
differential responses to asthma therapies. Variants in the β-receptor
(Arg16Gly in ADRB2), the glucocorticoid-induced transcript 1 gene,
and genes in the leukotriene synthesis and receptor pathways have
been associated with altered response to the pharmacologic agents
acting at those receptors or through those pathways.
While genetic variation plays a key role in asthma susceptibility, it
is important to understand that unraveling the complexities of the
genetic contribution to asthma remains elusive. To wit, only 2.5% of
asthma risk can be explained by the 31 single nucleotide
polymorphisms that have been associated with asthma.
A significant proportion of the heritability of asthma relates to the
heritability of atopy. Atopy is the genetic tendency toward specific
IgE production in response to allergen exposure. Serum levels of IgE
correlate closely with the development of asthma. The National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III found that
half of asthma in patients aged 6–59 could be attributed to atopy with
evidence of allergic sensitization. The allergens most associated with
risk include house dust mites, indoor fungi, cockroaches, and indoor
animals.
■ EXPOSURES AND RISK FACTORS
Allergic Sensitization and Allergen Exposure
Like asthma, the
development of allergic sensitization involves an interplay between
heritable susceptibility and allergen exposure. Allergen exposure
during vulnerable developmental periods is believed to increase the
risk of development of allergic sensitization in those with a tendency
toward atopy. Allergic sensitization is increased in industrialized
nations. Recent research has suggested that varied microbiome
exposure (exposure to bacteria and bacterial products) may
influence the development of atopy with decreased risk for atopy in
those in rural environments. Studies of the role of early allergen
avoidance in reducing the risk of developing asthma have produced
contradictory results, possibly related to the inability to eliminate all
allergen exposure.

Tobacco 
Maternal smoking and secondhand smoke exposure are
associated with increased childhood asthma. Childhood secondhand
smoke exposure increased asthma risk twofold. Active smoking is
estimated to increase the incidence of asthma by up to fourfold in
adolescents and young adults.

Air Pollution
Early life exposure to pollution increases the risk of
development of asthma. Proximity to major roadways increases the
risk of early childhood asthma, thought to be attributed to levels of
nitrogen dioxide exposure. Decreasing nitrogen dioxide exposure
has been found to decrease asthma incidence in children. Studies of
exposure to mixed pollutants suggest that most risk lies with carbon
monoxide and nitric dioxide, with marginal effects of sulfur dioxide.
Indoor air pollution from open fires and use of gas stoves has been
associated with increased risk of children developing asthma
symptoms. Mechanistically, pollutants are thought to cause oxidative
injury to the airways, producing airway inflammation and leading to
remodeling and increased risk of airway sensitization.

Infections 
Respiratory infections clearly can precipitate asthma
deteriorations. However, the degree to which respiratory infections
indicate susceptibility to asthma, represent a causal factor, or in
some cases provide protection from asthma is unclear. Incidence
and frequency of human rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial virus
infections in children are associated with development of asthma, but
whether they play a causal role is unclear. Evidence of prior
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection has been associated with the
development of asthma in Taiwanese adults.

Occupational Exposures 
Occupational asthma is estimated to
account for 10–25% of adult-onset asthma. The occupations
associated with the most cases in European Community Health
Surveys were nursing and cleaning. Two types of exposures are
recognized: (1) an immunologic stimulus (further subdivided into
high-molecular-weight [e.g., proteins, flour] and low-molecular-weight
[e.g., formaldehyde, diisocyanate] stimuli based on whether they act
as haptens or can directly stimulate a response), and (2) an irritative
stimulus. The immunologic form is associated with a latency period
between time of exposure and development of symptoms. The
irritative form, known as reactive airway dysfunction syndrome
(RADS), will be discussed below. A combination of genetic
predisposition (including atopy), timing, intensity of exposure, and
co-exposure (e.g., smoking) influences whether an individual will
develop occupational asthma.

Diet 
There are suggestions that prenatal diet or vitamin deficiency
may alter the risk of developing asthma. The evidence is not yet
definitive, but vitamin D insufficiency may increase asthma risk in the
progeny and supplementation may decrease such risk. Similarly,
preliminary studies suggest that maternal supplementation with
vitamins C and E and zinc may decrease asthma in children. One
study suggested that maternal polyunsaturated fatty acid
supplementation may decrease childhood asthma risk.
Observational studies have suggested that increased maternal sugar
intake may increase childhood asthma risk.

Obesity
Multiple studies suggest that obesity may be a risk factor for
development of childhood and adult asthma. Adipokines and IL-6
have been thought to play a pathobiologic role. Some have argued
that the risk is overestimated, and a study from NHANES II found an
association with dyspnea but not with airway obstruction.

Medications 
There are conflicting data regarding prenatal and early
childhood risk for asthma posed by certain classes of medications.
Use of H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors in pregnancy has
been associated with an increased risk of asthma in children (relative
risk, 1.36–1.45); however, another study found a small risk for H2
blockers only. Conflicting data have been presented on the risk of
perinatal acetaminophen and early childhood acetaminophen use. In
a prospective study, the use of acetaminophen was not associated
with an increased risk of exacerbations in young children with
asthma, when compared to ibuprofen.

Prenatal and Perinatal Risk Factors 
Preeclampsia and prematurity
have been associated with increased risk of asthma in the progeny.
Babies born by cesarean section are at higher risk for asthma.
Those with neonatal jaundice are also at increased risk. Breastfeeding reduced early wheezing but has a less clear effect on later
incidence of asthma.

Endogenous Developmental Risk Factors Asthma is more
prevalent among boys than girls, with the difference receding by age
20 and reversing (more prevalent among women) by age 40. Atopy
is more prevalent among boys in childhood, and they have reduced
airway size compared with girls. Both factors are thought to
contribute to the sex discrepancy. A subset of women develop
asthma around menopause. Such asthma tends to involve non–type
2 mechanisms. Pregnancy may precipitate or aggravate asthma as
well.

High-Concentration Irritant Exposure and RADS A solitary
exposure to a high concentration of irritant agents that rapidly
(usually within hours) produces bronchospasm and bronchial
hyperactivity is known as RADS. Causative agents include oxidizing
and reducing agents in an aerosol or high levels of particulates. The
acute pathology usually involves epithelial injury with neutrophilia.
There is little evidence of type 2 inflammation. This syndrome differs
from occupational asthma in that these patients have not become
sensitized to the provocative agent and can return to work in that
environment once they have recovered. However, the course of the
disease may be variable, with some series showing documented
abnormalities and persistent symptoms 10 years after exposure.

Fungi and Allergic Airway Mycoses One to 2% of patients with
asthma may have an IgE-mediated sensitization to colonization of
the airway by fungi, with the most common fungus causing such a
reaction being Aspergillus fumigatus. So-called allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is characterized by a type 2
airway inflammatory response to aspergillus with IgE >1000 IU/mL,
eosinophils >500/μL, positive skin test to Aspergillus, and specific
IgE and IgG antibodies to Aspergillus. Patients may have intermittent
mucus plugging and central bronchiectasis. Up to two-thirds of
patients will grow Aspergillus from the sputum. Treatment involves
systemic antifungal treatment with itraconazole or voriconazole and
oral corticosteroids.

Exercise-Induced Symptoms in Elite Athletes Exercise-induced
airway narrowing in elite athletes undertaking extreme exercise in
strenuous condition. These athletes may have little, or no, airway
hyperreactivity or asthma risk factors. The condition may involve
additional mechanisms including direct epithelial injury. Such a
syndrome has also been reported in swimmers possibly related to
pool chlorination.

■ TRIGGERS OF AIRWAY NARROWING
The risk factors and exposures reviewed above lead to increased
airway reactivity and a propensity to react to factors that trigger
airway narrowing (see Fig. 287-1). Almost all asthmatics can identify
triggers that will make their asthma worse. These triggers are listed
in Table 287-2. Many of them overlap with the risk factors and
etiologic factors reviewed above. In some cases, elimination of these
triggers may dramatically reduce the impairment caused by asthma.
In a minority, abatement can lead to “remission” so that these
patients no longer require asthma medications and do not
experience bronchospasm with their daily activities and routines.
While acute exposures to these triggers generally cause short-lived
bronchospasm, the bronchospasm may be severe enough that
treatment for an exacerbation is required. Chronic exposure may
lead to permanent deterioration in asthma control, although this does
not appear to be true for exercise or stress. It should be noted that
evidence suggests that severe asthma exacerbations (those
requiring systemic corticosteroids) may, in and of themselves,
accelerate lung function decline.

Allergens 
In patients with sensitization to particular allergens
through production of allergen-specific IgE, exposure to those
allergens by inhalation can result in activation of mast cells and
basophils with acute production of bronchoactive mediators (see Fig.
287-3). Such exposure can produce immediate bronchospasm (early
response) and a late response (2–24 h after exposure) with
bronchial narrowing and inflammation. These mechanisms can
account for reactions to inhalation of pollens, mold, or dust; insects
(especially cockroaches); animals; occupational materials; seasonal
worsening of asthma; and so-called “thunderstorm asthma.” Chronic
exposure may lead to persistent symptoms. While food allergies can
produce bronchospasm through anaphylaxis, food allergies are
generally not etiologically linked to asthma.

Irritants 
Many asthmatics report increased symptoms on exposure
to strong odors, smoke, combustion products, cleaning fluids, or
perfumes. In general, the effects are short-lived, although chronic
exposure (see “Occupational Exposures” above) and large-quantity
exposures (see discussion of RADS above) can lead to long-lasting
or permanent symptoms.

Viral Infections 
Most asthmatics report that asthma exacerbations
can be triggered by upper respiratory infections. The inflammation
that occurs may be neutrophilic as well as eosinophilic. There is
some evidence that IgE generation may reduce production of
interferon, possibly predisposing to the effects of upper respiratory
viruses. Increased airway reactivity after viral infections generally
persists for 4–6 weeks but, in some cases, may be associated with
permanent changes and impairment.

Exercise and Cold/Dry Air 
Exercise may be a trigger to asthmatic
bronchoconstriction in patients with asthma. Hyperventilation that
occurs with exercise dries the airway lining, changing the tonicity of
lining cells and causing release of bronchoconstrictive mediators.
This effect is more prominent the lower the moisture content of the
air, and since cold air has a lower absolute moisture content, the
lower the temperature of the inspired air, the less exercise is
required to induce bronchoconstriction. In addition, cold air may
produce airway edema during airway wall rewarming. At routine
levels of exercise, these effects are short-lived.

Air Pollution 
Increased rates of exacerbations have been
associated with increased ambient ozone, sulfur dioxide, and
nitrogen dioxide, among other air pollutants.

Drugs 
Beta blockers may trigger bronchospasm even when used
solely in ophthalmic preparations. While the more selective beta
blockers are safe for most asthmatics, beta blocker use may be a
cause of difficult-to-control asthma. Aspirin may precipitate
bronchospasm in those with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease
(see “Special Considerations”). Angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors (and to a lesser extent angiotensin receptor
blockers) may cause cough.

Occupational Exposures 
In addition to RADS (see above),
episodic and/or recurrent exposures to workplace irritants and/or
substances to which one has become sensitized can produce
symptoms. These symptoms are usually reduced when patients are
away from such exposures on weekends or vacation.

Stress 
Asthmatics may report increased symptoms with stress. The
mechanisms are poorly understood.

Hormonal Factors 
A small proportion of women report a regular
increase in perimenstrual symptoms, and symptoms may worsen
during perimenopause. This may be related to rapid fluctuations in
estrogen levels. Pregnancy can precipitate worsening of asthma in
approximately one-third of pregnant patients.

■ COMORBIDITIES
Comorbidities may make asthma difficult to manage, and the
common comorbidities are listed

Obesity 
Obese adults with asthma have more severe asthma
symptoms than lean adults and are two to four times more likely to
be hospitalized with an asthma exacerbation. Nonrandomized
studies have shown an improvement and significant reduction in
exacerbations after bariatric surgery.

Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease 
The presence of
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) predicts poor quality of life
and is an independent predictor of asthma exacerbations. Treatment
of symptomatic reflux disease has been shown to produce modest
improvements in airway function, symptoms, and exacerbation
frequency. Treatment of asymptomatic patients has not shown a
benefit.

Rhinosinusitis And/Or Nasal Polyposis 
Rhinosinusitis may be a
manifestation of the eosinophilic inflammation in the lower airway in
asthma. In addition, poorly controlled rhinosinusitis is believed to
aggravate asthma by several potential mechanisms including
inflammatory and irritant effects of the secretions on the lower
airway, neural reflexes, and production of inflammatory mediators
and cells that produce systemic inflammation. Treatment with
intranasal corticosteroids has been shown to decrease airway
reactivity and emergency department visits and hospitalizations.
Evidence for the benefit of surgical therapy is inconclusive. There is
increasing evidence that biologics targeted at type 2 inflammation
may also be particularly useful for asthma associated with
rhinosinusitis and polyposis in particular.
Nasal polyposis is rare in children, and its presence in adults with
asthma should raise suspicions of aspirin-exacerbated respiratory
disease (see “Special Considerations”).

Vocal Cord Dysfunction 
Now known as inducible laryngeal
obstruction, vocal cord dysfunction involves inappropriate narrowing
of the larynx, producing resistance to airflow. It can complicate
asthma and mimic it. It is more commonly seen in women and
patients with anxiety and depression. Definitive diagnosis involves
laryngoscopy during symptomatic episodes or during induced
obstruction.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (Copd) 
See “AsthmaCOPD Overlap” under “Special Considerations.”

Anxiety/Depression 
Increased rates of asthma exacerbations occur
in asthmatics with anxiety, depression, or chronic stress. Some
patients may be unable to distinguish anxiety attacks from asthma.

DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
■ APPROACH
A presumptive diagnosis of asthma can usually be made based on a
compatible history of recurrent wheezing, shortness of breath, chest
tightness, or cough related to common bronchoconstrictor
precipitants when appropriate components of the differential
diagnosis have been considered and/or eliminated. In some cases, a
therapeutic trial of low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) may be
considered. In all but the mildest cases, the diagnosis should be
confirmed with pulmonary function testing or demonstration of airway
hyperresponsiveness. Unfortunately, the diagnosis may be difficult to
confirm after initiation of therapy since airway obstruction and
hyperresponsiveness may be mitigated with therapy. A trial of
tapering medications may be necessary. Studies have shown that
more than one-third of patients with a physician diagnosis of asthma
do not meet the criteria for the diagnosis.
Adjunctive evaluation, as outlined below, should be undertaken to
identify precipitating factors and underlying mechanisms that may be
amenable to specific therapies (e.g., allergen avoidance). Cases that
require more than a daily moderate-dose ICS combined with a longacting β2-agonist (LABA) (together known as ICS/LABA) should
undergo more formal evaluation to assess comorbidities that may
make asthma difficult to control and a reassessment of any possible
confounding diagnoses that may mimic asthma symptoms (see
Table 287-3).
■ PRIMARY ASSESSMENT TOOLS FOR ESTABLISHING ADIAGNOSIS
History 
Patients with asthma most commonly complain of episodes
of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, mucus production,
or cough upon exposure to triggers listed in Table 287-2. Symptoms
may be worse on arising in the morning. Some may have nocturnal
symptoms alone. However, such patients should be evaluated for
postnasal drip or GERD if that is their sole presenting symptom.
Patients frequently complain of symptoms with rapid changes of
temperature or humidity. Exercise-induced symptoms are common
with increased sensitivity to cold air. As compared to cardiac sources
of dyspnea, exercise symptoms tend to develop more slowly after
initiation of exercise and tend to resolve more slowly unless a β2agonist is administered after the onset of symptoms. A careful
exposure history should be obtained for home (e.g., pets, molds,
dust, direct or secondhand smoke), work (work environment and
exposure to occupational sensitizers), and recreational (e.g.,
hobbies, recreational inhalants) exposures. Allergen-sensitized
patients may complain of symptoms on exposure to known allergens
such as animals and may complain of increased symptoms during
specific pollen seasons. Up to two-thirds of patients with asthma will
be atopic (as opposed to half of the U.S. population), and almost half
will have a history of rhinitis, with many complaining of intermittent
sinusitis. In patients with adult-onset asthma, a careful occupational
history should be obtained and a history of reactions to nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or use of new medications, such
as beta blockers (including ophthalmic preparations) and ACE
inhibitors (due to potential cough), should be elicited.

Physical Examination 
In between acute attacks, physical findings
may be normal. Many patients will have evidence of allergic rhinitis
with pale nasal mucus membranes. Five percent or more of patients
may have nasal polyps, with increased frequency in those with more
severe asthma and aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Some
patients will have wheezing on expiration (less so on inspiration).
During an acute asthma attack, patients present with tachypnea and
tachycardia, and use of accessory muscles can be observed.
Wheezing, with a prolonged expiratory phase, is common during
attacks, but as the severity of airway obstruction progresses, the
chest may become “silent” with loss of breath sounds.

Pulmonary Function Tests 
Effective reduction of the airway lumen
in asthma produces increased resistance to airflow, which can be
detected as a reduction in expiratory airflow during forced expiratory
maneuvers. The peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1), and the FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio
are reduced below the lower limit of normal. The flow-volume loop
may show a characteristic scalloping (see Chap. 286). These
findings may not be present during acute attacks or on therapy
(especially after recent use of bronchodilators). Reversibility is
defined as a ≥12% increase in the FEV1 and an absolute increase of
≥200 mL at least 15 min after administration of a β2-agonist or after
several weeks of corticosteroid therapy. Diurnal peak flow variability
of >20% has also been proposed as an indicator of reversible
airways disease, but it is less reliable due to difficulties with quality
control and variability of home assessments. Lung volumes and
diffusing capacity should be normal in uncomplicated asthma.
Assessment of Airway Responsiveness 
In cases where
pulmonary function tests are nonconfirmatory and the diagnosis
remains in doubt, testing to demonstrate increased reactivity to
provocative stimuli in the laboratory can be undertaken.
Methacholine, a cholinergic agonist, inhaled in increasing
concentrations is most commonly used. A provocative dose
producing a 20% drop in FEV1 (PD20) is calculated, with a value
≤400 μg indicative of airway reactivity. Mannitol is used as well, and
occasionally, hypertonic saline may be used. Challenge with
exercise and/or cold, dry air can be performed, with a positive
response recorded if there is a ≥10% drop in FEV1 from baseline. In
the case of suspected environmental/occupational exposures,
specific allergen challenges may be undertaken in highly specialized
labs.

■ ADJUNCTIVE ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Eosinophil Counts 
A large proportion of asthma patients not
treated with oral or high-dose ICSs will have eosinophil counts ≥300
cells/μL. Eosinophil counts correlate with severity of disease in
population studies. Their presence in patients with severe asthma
indicates a likelihood that the patient would respond to medications
targeted at type 2 inflammation. Extremely elevated levels should
prompt consideration of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
or primary eosinophilic disorders.

IgE, Skin Tests, and Radioallergosorbent Tests Total serum IgE
levels are useful in considering whether patients with severe asthma
would be eligible for anti-IgE therapy. Levels >1000 IU/mL should
prompt consideration of ABPA. Skin tests, or their in vitro
counterparts that detect IgE directed at specific antigens
(radioallergosorbent test [RAST]), can be useful in confirming atopy
and suggesting allergic rhinitis, which can complicate asthma
management. Allergy investigations may be useful, when correlated
with a history of reactions, in identifying environmental exposures
that may be aggravating asthma.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide Fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) in
exhaled breath is an approximate indicator of eosinophilic
inflammation in the airways. It is easily suppressed by ICSs and,
thus, can be used to assess adherence in patients in whom it was
initially elevated. Elevated levels (>35–40 ppb) in untreated patients
are indicative of eosinophilic inflammation. Levels >20–25 ppb in
patients with severe asthma on moderate- to high-dose ICS indicate
either poor adherence or persistent type 2 inflammation despite
therapy.

■ ADDITIONAL EVALUATION IN SEVERE/POORLY RESPONSIVE ASTHMA
In patients with poorly responsive asthma, additional evaluations for
comorbidities (see Table 287-3) may be necessary, including sinus
radiographic studies (even in those who have no symptoms of sinus
disease) and esophageal studies in those who have symptoms of
reflux. In patients with nonreversible disease, many obtain a serum
α1 antitrypsin level. Additionally, the following evaluations may be of
utility in poorly responsive asthma.

Chest Radiography 
Chest CT can be useful to assess for the
presence of bronchiectasis and other structural abnormalities that
could produce airway obstruction. New image analysis tools are
being used in the research setting to assess airway properties such
as airway wall thickness, airway diameter, and evidence of air
trapping.

Sputum 
Induced sputum may be used in more specialized centers
to help characterize type 2 and non–type 2 inflammation by detection
of eosinophils and neutrophils, respectively. In severe asthma, there
is some evidence that some patients may have localized persistent
eosinophilic airway inflammation despite lack of peripheral
eosinophils on blood analysis.

TREATMENT

Asthma
GOALS OF ASTHMA THERAPY AND ASSESSMENT OF CONTROL
Goals of asthma therapy in terms of achieving control of symptoms
and reducing risk (as reflected in frequency of asthma
exacerbations) are listed in Table 287-4. The therapeutic agents
used in treatment are discussed below, and an integrated approach
to care is discussed subsequently.

A comprehensive treatment approach involves avoiding and
reducing asthma triggers and, if necessary, the adjunctive use of
medications. Asthma medications are primarily divided into those
that relax smooth muscle and produce a fairly rapid relief of acute
symptoms and those that target inflammation or mediator
production. The former medications are commonly referred to as
reliever medications, and the latter are known as controller
medications.

REDUCING TRIGGERS
Mitigation 
As shown in Tables 287-1 and 287-2, triggers and
exposures can cause asthma and make it difficult to control. In the
case of those with occupational exposures, removal from the
offending environment may sometimes result in complete resolution
of symptoms or significant improvement. Secondhand smoke
exposure and frequent exposure to combustion products of
cannabis are remediable environmental exposures as well. The
removal of pets that are clearly associated with symptoms can
reduce symptoms. Pest control at home and in the school in those
with evidence of IgE-mediated sensitivity (skin test or IgE RAST)
may also be beneficial. The effect of dust or mold control in
reducing asthma symptoms has been more variable. There is
moderate evidence that dust control (impermeable mattress and
pillowcase covers) in those patients with symptoms and
sensitization may be effective in reducing symptoms only when
conducted as part of a comprehensive allergen mitigation strategy.

Allergen Immunotherapy 
Allergen immunotherapy reduces IgEmediated reactions to the allergens administered. It clearly reduces
the symptoms of allergic rhinitis and thus may be helpful in reducing
this comorbidity. The evidence for its effectiveness in isolated
asthma in those who are sensitized and have clinical symptoms is
variable. Due to the risk of anaphylaxis, guidelines generally
recommend immunotherapy only in patients whose asthma is under
control and who have mild to moderate asthma. The evidence base
for the effectiveness of sublingual allergen immunotherapy in the
treatment of asthma is not substantial.

Vaccination 
Respiratory infections are a major cause of asthma
exacerbations. Patients with asthma are strongly advised to receive
both types of currently available pneumococcal vaccines and yearly
influenza vaccines. COVID-19 vaccination is advised, as well.

MEDICATIONS
Bronchodilators 
Bronchodilators relax airway smooth muscle.
There are three major classes of bronchodilators, β2-agonists,
anticholinergics, and theophylline.

β2-Agonists 
Available in inhaled or oral form, these agents
activate β2-receptors present on airway smooth muscle. Such
receptors are also present on mast cells, but they contribute little to
the efficacy of these agents in asthma. β2-receptors are G protein–
coupled receptors that activate adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic
AMP, which results in relaxation of smooth muscle.

Use 
β2-Agonists are primarily used in inhaled forms to provide
relief of bronchospasm or to reduce the degree of bronchospasm
anticipated in response to exercise or other provocative stimuli.
Regular use has been associated with tachyphylaxis of the
bronchoprotective effect and possible increased airway reactivity.
This may be more common in patients with a polymorphism at the
16th amino acid position of the β2-receptor. Frequent short-acting
β-2 agonist use has been associated with increased asthma
mortality resulting in decreased enthusiasm for use in isolation
without inhaled corticosteroids.

Short-Acting β2-Agonists 
Albuterol (also known as salbutamol) is
the most commonly used agent. Bronchodilation begins within 3–5
min of inhalation, and effects generally last 4–6 h. It is most
commonly administered by metered-dose inhaler. Solutions for
nebulization are also used, especially for relief of bronchospasm in
children. Oral forms are available but are not commonly used.

Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
Salmeterol and formoterol are the two
available LABAs. They have an ∼12-h duration of action.
Formoterol has a quick onset comparable to the short-acting β2agonists. Salmeterol has a slower onset of action. These agents
can be used for prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm. In
contrast to their use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), these agents are not recommended for use as
monotherapy in the treatment of asthma. Their use in asthma is
generally restricted to use in combination with an ICS.

Ultra-Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
These agents (indacaterol,
olodaterol, and vilanterol) have a 24-h effect. They are only used in
combination with ICSs in the treatment of asthma.

Safety 
β2-Agonists are fairly specific for the β2-receptors, but in
some patients and especially at higher doses, they can produce
tremor, tachycardia, palpitations, and hypertension. They promote
potassium reentry into cells, and at high doses, they can produce
hypokalemia. Type B (nonhypoxic) lactic acidosis can also occur
and is thought to be secondary to increased glycogenolysis and
glycolysis and increased lipolysis, leading to a rise in fatty acid
levels, which can inhibit conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-coenzyme A.
Increased asthma mortality was associated with high-potency
β2-agonists in Australia and New Zealand. Increased use of β2agonists for relief of bronchospasm is a clear marker of poor
asthma control and has been associated with increased mortality.
Questions had been raised as to whether adding LABAs to ICS
might be associated with severe adverse asthma outcomes, but
several studies have not detected such outcomes in comparison to
maintaining the ICS dose.

Anticholinergics 
Cholinergic nerve–induced smooth-muscle
constriction plays a role in asthmatic bronchospasm. Anticholinergic
medications can produce smooth-muscle relaxation by antagonizing
this mechanism of airway narrowing. Agents that have been
developed for asthma have been pharmacologically designed to be
less systemically absorbed so as to minimize their systemic
anticholinergic effects. The long-acting agents in this class are
known as long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs).

Use 
The short-acting agents in this class can be used alone for
acute bronchodilation. They appear to be somewhat less effective
than β2-agonists and have a slower onset of action as well.

Safety 
Dry mouth may occur. At higher doses and in the elderly,
acute glaucoma and urinary retention have been reported. There
was a numerical (but not significant) difference in mortality in
African Americans treated with ICS/LAMA versus ICS/LABA for
asthma.

Theophylline 
Theophylline, an oral compound that increases
cyclic AMP levels by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, is now rarely
used for asthma due to its narrow therapeutic window, drug-drug
interactions, and reduced bronchodilation as compared to other
agents.

Controller (Anti-Inflammatory/Antimediator) Therapies 
Socalled “controller” therapies reduce asthma exacerbations and
improve long-term control, decreasing the need for intermittent use
of bronchodilator therapies. None of these therapies have yet been
shown to prevent progression of airway remodeling or the more
rapid decline in lung function that can occur in a subset of asthma
patients.

Corticosteroids 
Corticosteroids are particularly effective in
reducing type 2 inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness.
Corticosteroids bind to a cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor to form
a complex that translocates to the nucleus. The complex binds to
positive and negative response elements that result in inhibition of
T-cell activation; eosinophil function, migration, and proliferation;
and proinflammatory cytokine elaboration and activation of nuclear
factor-κB. It also attaches to other transcription factors, resulting in
deactivation of other proinflammatory pathways.

Use 
Corticosteroids reduce airway hyperresponsiveness, improve
airway function, prevent asthma exacerbations, and improve
asthma symptoms. Corticosteroid use by inhalation (ICSs)
minimizes systemic toxicity and represents a cornerstone of asthma
treatment.

ICS and ICS/LABA 
ICSs are the cornerstone of asthma therapy.
They take advantage of the pleiotropic effects of corticosteroids to
produce salutary impact at levels of systemic effect considerably
lower than oral corticosteroids. Their use is associated with
decreased asthma mortality. They are generally used regularly
twice a day as first-line therapy for all forms of persistent asthma.
Doses are increased, and they are combined with LABAs to control
asthma of increasing severity. European guidelines now
recommend their intermittent use even in intermittent asthma.
Combining them with LABAs permits effective control at lower ICS
dose. Longer-acting preparations permitting once-a-day use are
available. Their effects can be noticeable in several days, but
continued improvement may occur over months of therapy, with the
majority of improvement evident within the first month of regular
use. Adherence to regular therapy is generally poor, with as few as
25% of total annual prescriptions being refilled. Very high doses are
sometimes used to reduce oral corticosteroid requirements. Not all
patients respond to ICS. Increasing evidence suggests that the
most responsive patients are those with significant type 2–mediated
asthma.

Oral Corticosteroids 
Chronic oral corticosteroids (OCSs) at the
lowest doses possible (due to side effects) are used in patients who
cannot achieve acceptable asthma control without them. Alternateday dosing may be preferred, and pneumocystis pneumonia
prophylaxis should be administered for those maintained on a daily
prednisone dose of ≥20 mg. OCSs are also used to treat asthma
exacerbations, frequently at a dose of 40–60 mg/d of prednisone or
equivalent for 1–2 weeks. Since they are well absorbed, they may
also be used for managing hospitalized patients.

Intravenous Corticosteroids 
Intravenous preparations are
frequently used in hospitalized patients. Patients are rapidly
transitioned to OCS once their condition has stabilized.

Intramuscular Corticosteroids 
In high-risk, poorly adherent
patients, intramuscular triamcinolone acetonide has been used to
achieve asthma control and reduce exacerbations.

Safety 
Chronic administration of systemic corticosteroids is
associated with a plethora of side effects including diabetes,
osteoporosis, cataracts and glaucoma, bruising, weight gain, truncal
obesity, hypertension, ulcers, depression, and accelerated cardiac
risk, among others. Appropriate monitoring and infectious
(pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis for those treated chronically
with ≥20 mg prednisone/d) and bone health prophylaxis are
necessary. Intermittent “bursts” of systemic corticosteroids to treat
asthma exacerbations are associated with reduced side effects, but
observational studies have suggested that the cumulative dose over
time is associated with deleterious side effects.
ICSs have dramatically reduced side effects as compared to
OCSs. At higher doses, bruising occurs and osteoporosis can
accelerate. There is a small increase in glaucoma and cataracts.
Local effects include thrush, which can be reduced by use of a
spacer and gargling. Hoarseness may be the result of a direct
myopathic effect on the vocal cords. Rare patients exhibit side
effects even at moderate doses of ICS. Children may experience
growth suppression.

Leukotriene Modifiers 
Agents that inhibit production of
leukotrienes (zileuton, an inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase) or the action
of leukotrienes at the CysLT1 receptor (montelukast and zafirlukast)
are moderately effective in asthma.
They can improve airway function and reduce exacerbations but
not to the same degree as bronchodilators or ICS, respectively.
They are also effective in reducing symptoms of allergic rhinitis and,
thus, can be used in patients with concomitant allergic rhinitis.
Montelukast, in particular, is frequently used in children with mild
asthma due to concerns of ICS-related growth suppression.
Montelukast use may decrease due to safety warnings regarding
depression with this compound. Leukotriene modifiers are effective
in preventing exercise-induced bronchoconstriction without the
tachyphylactic effects that occur with regular use of LABAs.
Leukotriene modifiers are particularly effective in aspirinexacerbated respiratory disease, which is characterized by
significant leukotriene overproduction. They have also shown
modest effect as add-on therapy in patients poorly controlled on
high-dose ICS/LABA.

CysLT1 Antagonists 
Montelukast and zafirlukast are administered
orally once or twice daily, respectively. The onset of effect is rapid
(hours), with the majority of chronic effectiveness seen within 1
month.

5-Lipoxygenase Inhibition 
Zileuton in its extended form is
administered orally twice a day.

Safety 
Montelukast is well tolerated, but an association with
suicidal ideation has now resulted in a warning label from the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Zileuton increases liver function
tests (transaminases) in 3% of patients. Intermittent monitoring is
suggested. It inhibits CYP1A2, and appropriate dose adjustments of
concomitant medications may be necessary.

Cromolyn Sodium 
Cromolyn sodium is an inhaled agent believed
to stabilize mast cells. It is only available by nebulization and must
be administered two to four times a day. It is mildly to modestly
effective and appears to be helpful for exercise-induced
bronchospasm. It is used primarily in pediatrics in those concerned
about ICS side effects.

Anti-IgE 
Omalizumab, a monoclonal antibody to the Fc portion of
the IgE molecule, prevents the binding of IgE to mast cells and
basophils. Reduction in free IgE that can bind to effector cells
blocks antigen-related signaling, which is responsible for production
or release of many of the mediators and cytokines critical to asthma
pathobiology. In addition, through feedback mechanisms, reduction
in IgE production occurs as well. Anti-IgE has been shown to
increase interferon production in rhinovirus infections, decrease
viral-induced asthma exacerbations, and reduce duration and peak
viral shedding. This effect is believed to be due to IgE’s ability to
reduce interferon γ production in response to viral infections.

Use 
In asthma, anti-IgE has been tested in patients with a
circulating IgE ≥30 IU/mL and a positive skin test or RAST to a
perennial allergen. It is generally used in patients not responsive to
moderate- to high-dose ICS/LABA. It reduces exacerbations by 25–
50% and can reduce asthma symptoms but has minimal effect on
lung function. Anti-IgE is dosed based on body weight and
circulating IgE and is administered subcutaneously every 2–4
weeks depending on the calculated dose. In the United States, the
maximum dose is 300 mg every 2 weeks, which generally restricts
the drug to those with a body weight ≤150 kg. Most effects are
generally seen in 3–6 months. Retrospective studies have
suggested that patients with an exhaled nitric oxide approximately
≥20 ppb or circulating eosinophils ≥260/μL have the greatest
response as ascertained by reduction in exacerbations. FeNO is
slightly reduced by treatment, but circulating IgE, as measured by
available clinical tests, is not affected since these tests measure
total circulating IgE, not free IgE.

Safety 
The incidence of side effects is low. Anaphylaxis has been
reported in 0.2% of patients receiving the drug.

IL-5–Active Drugs 
Mepolizumab and reslizumab are monoclonal
antibodies that bind to IL-5, and benralizumab binds to the IL-5
receptor. They rapidly (within a day) reduce circulating eosinophils.

Use 
In patients symptomatic on moderate- to high-dose
ICS/LABA, generally with two or more exacerbations that require
OCS per year and with an eosinophil count of ≥300/μL, IL-5–active
drugs reduce exacerbations by about half or more. FEV1 and
symptoms improve moderately as well. In patients who are not on
chronic OCSs, these drugs are less effective in those with
eosinophil counts <300/μL. They are also effective in reducing the
need for chronic OCSs regardless of circulating eosinophil count
(presumably due to the fact that many of those patients have type 2
inflammation but their circulating eosinophils have been suppressed
by the systemic OCS). FeNO and IgE are relatively unaffected by
these drugs. Most clinical effects are usually seen within 3–6
months.

Safety 
These drugs are associated with minimal side effects.
Mepolizumab and benralizumab are approved for home
administration.

Anti–IL-4/13 
The IL-4 and IL-13 receptors are heterodimers that
share a common subunit, IL-4 receptor α. Dupilumab binds to this
subunit and, thus, blocks signaling through both receptors.

Use 
In addition to effectiveness in the phenotype of patients who
respond to anti–IL-5 therapies, poorly controlled patients on
moderate- to high-dose ICS/LABA with an FeNO of 20–25 ppb also
appear to respond to dupilumab even if their peripheral eosinophils
are not elevated. Dupilumab reduces exacerbations by ≥50%,
decreases symptoms, and may produce more of an effect on FEV1
than anti–IL-5 drugs. It gradually reduces FeNO and IgE levels.
Paradoxically, circulating eosinophil counts may initially temporarily
increase. Most effects are seen by 3–6 months of therapy.

Safety 
Side effects are minimal but cases of serious systemic
eosinophilia associated with the reduction of oral corticosteroids
have been noted. This drug is also approved for home
administration and is also approved for atopic dermatitis.

Bronchial Thermoplasty, Alternative Therapies, and Therapies
Under Development • Bronchial Thermoplasty 
This procedure
involves radiofrequency ablation of the airway smooth muscle in the
major airways administered through a series of three
bronchoscopies for patients with severe asthma. There is some
evidence that it may reduce exacerbations in very select patients.
The procedure may be accompanied by significant morbidity, and
most guidelines do not recommend it other than in the context of
clinical trials or registries.

Alternative Therapies 
Alternative therapies such as acupuncture
and yoga have not been shown to improve asthma in controlled
trials. Studies with placebo have demonstrated that there may be a
significant response to placebo.

Therapies in Development Trials are underway targeting
pathways and receptors shown in Fig. 287-3. Those in more
advanced stages of development include therapies targeting TSLP,
IL-33, and CRTH2. Studies targeting IL-17 and TNF-α have not
shown efficacy, but it is unclear if they were appropriately targeted.
Whether these interventions might prove useful for particular
endotypes of asthma is unclear. Proof-of-concept studies targeting
mast cells via inhibition of tyrosine kinase have suggested efficacy
in severe asthma.
