DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
■ APPROACH
A presumptive diagnosis of asthma can usually be made based on a
compatible history of recurrent wheezing, shortness of breath, chest
tightness, or cough related to common bronchoconstrictor
precipitants when appropriate components of the differential
diagnosis have been considered and/or eliminated. In some cases, a
therapeutic trial of low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) may be
considered. In all but the mildest cases, the diagnosis should be
confirmed with pulmonary function testing or demonstration of airway
hyperresponsiveness. Unfortunately, the diagnosis may be difficult to
confirm after initiation of therapy since airway obstruction and
hyperresponsiveness may be mitigated with therapy. A trial of
tapering medications may be necessary. Studies have shown that
more than one-third of patients with a physician diagnosis of asthma
do not meet the criteria for the diagnosis.
Adjunctive evaluation, as outlined below, should be undertaken to
identify precipitating factors and underlying mechanisms that may be
amenable to specific therapies (e.g., allergen avoidance). Cases that
require more than a daily moderate-dose ICS combined with a longacting β2-agonist (LABA) (together known as ICS/LABA) should
undergo more formal evaluation to assess comorbidities that may
make asthma difficult to control and a reassessment of any possible
confounding diagnoses that may mimic asthma symptoms (see
Table 287-3).
■ PRIMARY ASSESSMENT TOOLS FOR ESTABLISHING ADIAGNOSIS
History 
Patients with asthma most commonly complain of episodes
of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, mucus production,
or cough upon exposure to triggers listed in Table 287-2. Symptoms
may be worse on arising in the morning. Some may have nocturnal
symptoms alone. However, such patients should be evaluated for
postnasal drip or GERD if that is their sole presenting symptom.
Patients frequently complain of symptoms with rapid changes of
temperature or humidity. Exercise-induced symptoms are common
with increased sensitivity to cold air. As compared to cardiac sources
of dyspnea, exercise symptoms tend to develop more slowly after
initiation of exercise and tend to resolve more slowly unless a β2agonist is administered after the onset of symptoms. A careful
exposure history should be obtained for home (e.g., pets, molds,
dust, direct or secondhand smoke), work (work environment and
exposure to occupational sensitizers), and recreational (e.g.,
hobbies, recreational inhalants) exposures. Allergen-sensitized
patients may complain of symptoms on exposure to known allergens
such as animals and may complain of increased symptoms during
specific pollen seasons. Up to two-thirds of patients with asthma will
be atopic (as opposed to half of the U.S. population), and almost half
will have a history of rhinitis, with many complaining of intermittent
sinusitis. In patients with adult-onset asthma, a careful occupational
history should be obtained and a history of reactions to nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or use of new medications, such
as beta blockers (including ophthalmic preparations) and ACE
inhibitors (due to potential cough), should be elicited.

Physical Examination 
In between acute attacks, physical findings
may be normal. Many patients will have evidence of allergic rhinitis
with pale nasal mucus membranes. Five percent or more of patients
may have nasal polyps, with increased frequency in those with more
severe asthma and aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Some
patients will have wheezing on expiration (less so on inspiration).
During an acute asthma attack, patients present with tachypnea and
tachycardia, and use of accessory muscles can be observed.
Wheezing, with a prolonged expiratory phase, is common during
attacks, but as the severity of airway obstruction progresses, the
chest may become “silent” with loss of breath sounds.

Pulmonary Function Tests 
Effective reduction of the airway lumen
in asthma produces increased resistance to airflow, which can be
detected as a reduction in expiratory airflow during forced expiratory
maneuvers. The peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1), and the FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio
are reduced below the lower limit of normal. The flow-volume loop
may show a characteristic scalloping (see Chap. 286). These
findings may not be present during acute attacks or on therapy
(especially after recent use of bronchodilators). Reversibility is
defined as a ≥12% increase in the FEV1 and an absolute increase of
≥200 mL at least 15 min after administration of a β2-agonist or after
several weeks of corticosteroid therapy. Diurnal peak flow variability
of >20% has also been proposed as an indicator of reversible
airways disease, but it is less reliable due to difficulties with quality
control and variability of home assessments. Lung volumes and
diffusing capacity should be normal in uncomplicated asthma.
Assessment of Airway Responsiveness 
In cases where
pulmonary function tests are nonconfirmatory and the diagnosis
remains in doubt, testing to demonstrate increased reactivity to
provocative stimuli in the laboratory can be undertaken.
Methacholine, a cholinergic agonist, inhaled in increasing
concentrations is most commonly used. A provocative dose
producing a 20% drop in FEV1 (PD20) is calculated, with a value
≤400 μg indicative of airway reactivity. Mannitol is used as well, and
occasionally, hypertonic saline may be used. Challenge with
exercise and/or cold, dry air can be performed, with a positive
response recorded if there is a ≥10% drop in FEV1 from baseline. In
the case of suspected environmental/occupational exposures,
specific allergen challenges may be undertaken in highly specialized
labs.

■ ADJUNCTIVE ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Eosinophil Counts 
A large proportion of asthma patients not
treated with oral or high-dose ICSs will have eosinophil counts ≥300
cells/μL. Eosinophil counts correlate with severity of disease in
population studies. Their presence in patients with severe asthma
indicates a likelihood that the patient would respond to medications
targeted at type 2 inflammation. Extremely elevated levels should
prompt consideration of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
or primary eosinophilic disorders.

IgE, Skin Tests, and Radioallergosorbent Tests Total serum IgE
levels are useful in considering whether patients with severe asthma
would be eligible for anti-IgE therapy. Levels >1000 IU/mL should
prompt consideration of ABPA. Skin tests, or their in vitro
counterparts that detect IgE directed at specific antigens
(radioallergosorbent test [RAST]), can be useful in confirming atopy
and suggesting allergic rhinitis, which can complicate asthma
management. Allergy investigations may be useful, when correlated
with a history of reactions, in identifying environmental exposures
that may be aggravating asthma.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide Fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) in
exhaled breath is an approximate indicator of eosinophilic
inflammation in the airways. It is easily suppressed by ICSs and,
thus, can be used to assess adherence in patients in whom it was
initially elevated. Elevated levels (>35–40 ppb) in untreated patients
are indicative of eosinophilic inflammation. Levels >20–25 ppb in
patients with severe asthma on moderate- to high-dose ICS indicate
either poor adherence or persistent type 2 inflammation despite
therapy.

■ ADDITIONAL EVALUATION IN SEVERE/POORLY RESPONSIVE ASTHMA
In patients with poorly responsive asthma, additional evaluations for
comorbidities (see Table 287-3) may be necessary, including sinus
radiographic studies (even in those who have no symptoms of sinus
disease) and esophageal studies in those who have symptoms of
reflux. In patients with nonreversible disease, many obtain a serum
α1 antitrypsin level. Additionally, the following evaluations may be of
utility in poorly responsive asthma.

Chest Radiography 
Chest CT can be useful to assess for the
presence of bronchiectasis and other structural abnormalities that
could produce airway obstruction. New image analysis tools are
being used in the research setting to assess airway properties such
as airway wall thickness, airway diameter, and evidence of air
trapping.

Sputum 
Induced sputum may be used in more specialized centers
to help characterize type 2 and non–type 2 inflammation by detection
of eosinophils and neutrophils, respectively. In severe asthma, there
is some evidence that some patients may have localized persistent
eosinophilic airway inflammation despite lack of peripheral
eosinophils on blood analysis.

TREATMENT

Asthma
GOALS OF ASTHMA THERAPY AND ASSESSMENT OF CONTROL
Goals of asthma therapy in terms of achieving control of symptoms
and reducing risk (as reflected in frequency of asthma
exacerbations) are listed in Table 287-4. The therapeutic agents
used in treatment are discussed below, and an integrated approach
to care is discussed subsequently.

A comprehensive treatment approach involves avoiding and
reducing asthma triggers and, if necessary, the adjunctive use of
medications. Asthma medications are primarily divided into those
that relax smooth muscle and produce a fairly rapid relief of acute
symptoms and those that target inflammation or mediator
production. The former medications are commonly referred to as
reliever medications, and the latter are known as controller
medications.

REDUCING TRIGGERS
Mitigation 
As shown in Tables 287-1 and 287-2, triggers and
exposures can cause asthma and make it difficult to control. In the
case of those with occupational exposures, removal from the
offending environment may sometimes result in complete resolution
of symptoms or significant improvement. Secondhand smoke
exposure and frequent exposure to combustion products of
cannabis are remediable environmental exposures as well. The
removal of pets that are clearly associated with symptoms can
reduce symptoms. Pest control at home and in the school in those
with evidence of IgE-mediated sensitivity (skin test or IgE RAST)
may also be beneficial. The effect of dust or mold control in
reducing asthma symptoms has been more variable. There is
moderate evidence that dust control (impermeable mattress and
pillowcase covers) in those patients with symptoms and
sensitization may be effective in reducing symptoms only when
conducted as part of a comprehensive allergen mitigation strategy.

Allergen Immunotherapy 
Allergen immunotherapy reduces IgEmediated reactions to the allergens administered. It clearly reduces
the symptoms of allergic rhinitis and thus may be helpful in reducing
this comorbidity. The evidence for its effectiveness in isolated
asthma in those who are sensitized and have clinical symptoms is
variable. Due to the risk of anaphylaxis, guidelines generally
recommend immunotherapy only in patients whose asthma is under
control and who have mild to moderate asthma. The evidence base
for the effectiveness of sublingual allergen immunotherapy in the
treatment of asthma is not substantial.

Vaccination 
Respiratory infections are a major cause of asthma
exacerbations. Patients with asthma are strongly advised to receive
both types of currently available pneumococcal vaccines and yearly
influenza vaccines. COVID-19 vaccination is advised, as well.

MEDICATIONS
Bronchodilators 
Bronchodilators relax airway smooth muscle.
There are three major classes of bronchodilators, β2-agonists,
anticholinergics, and theophylline.

β2-Agonists 
Available in inhaled or oral form, these agents
activate β2-receptors present on airway smooth muscle. Such
receptors are also present on mast cells, but they contribute little to
the efficacy of these agents in asthma. β2-receptors are G protein–
coupled receptors that activate adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic
AMP, which results in relaxation of smooth muscle.

Use 
β2-Agonists are primarily used in inhaled forms to provide
relief of bronchospasm or to reduce the degree of bronchospasm
anticipated in response to exercise or other provocative stimuli.
Regular use has been associated with tachyphylaxis of the
bronchoprotective effect and possible increased airway reactivity.
This may be more common in patients with a polymorphism at the
16th amino acid position of the β2-receptor. Frequent short-acting
β-2 agonist use has been associated with increased asthma
mortality resulting in decreased enthusiasm for use in isolation
without inhaled corticosteroids.

Short-Acting β2-Agonists 
Albuterol (also known as salbutamol) is
the most commonly used agent. Bronchodilation begins within 3–5
min of inhalation, and effects generally last 4–6 h. It is most
commonly administered by metered-dose inhaler. Solutions for
nebulization are also used, especially for relief of bronchospasm in
children. Oral forms are available but are not commonly used.

Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
Salmeterol and formoterol are the two
available LABAs. They have an ∼12-h duration of action.
Formoterol has a quick onset comparable to the short-acting β2agonists. Salmeterol has a slower onset of action. These agents
can be used for prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm. In
contrast to their use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), these agents are not recommended for use as
monotherapy in the treatment of asthma. Their use in asthma is
generally restricted to use in combination with an ICS.

Ultra-Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
These agents (indacaterol,
olodaterol, and vilanterol) have a 24-h effect. They are only used in
combination with ICSs in the treatment of asthma.

Safety 
β2-Agonists are fairly specific for the β2-receptors, but in
some patients and especially at higher doses, they can produce
tremor, tachycardia, palpitations, and hypertension. They promote
potassium reentry into cells, and at high doses, they can produce
hypokalemia. Type B (nonhypoxic) lactic acidosis can also occur
and is thought to be secondary to increased glycogenolysis and
glycolysis and increased lipolysis, leading to a rise in fatty acid
levels, which can inhibit conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-coenzyme A.
Increased asthma mortality was associated with high-potency
β2-agonists in Australia and New Zealand. Increased use of β2agonists for relief of bronchospasm is a clear marker of poor
asthma control and has been associated with increased mortality.
Questions had been raised as to whether adding LABAs to ICS
might be associated with severe adverse asthma outcomes, but
several studies have not detected such outcomes in comparison to
maintaining the ICS dose.

Anticholinergics 
Cholinergic nerve–induced smooth-muscle
constriction plays a role in asthmatic bronchospasm. Anticholinergic
medications can produce smooth-muscle relaxation by antagonizing
this mechanism of airway narrowing. Agents that have been
developed for asthma have been pharmacologically designed to be
less systemically absorbed so as to minimize their systemic
anticholinergic effects. The long-acting agents in this class are
known as long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs).

Use 
The short-acting agents in this class can be used alone for
acute bronchodilation. They appear to be somewhat less effective
than β2-agonists and have a slower onset of action as well.

Safety 
Dry mouth may occur. At higher doses and in the elderly,
acute glaucoma and urinary retention have been reported. There
was a numerical (but not significant) difference in mortality in
African Americans treated with ICS/LAMA versus ICS/LABA for
asthma.

Theophylline 
Theophylline, an oral compound that increases
cyclic AMP levels by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, is now rarely
used for asthma due to its narrow therapeutic window, drug-drug
interactions, and reduced bronchodilation as compared to other
agents.

Controller (Anti-Inflammatory/Antimediator) Therapies 
Socalled “controller” therapies reduce asthma exacerbations and
improve long-term control, decreasing the need for intermittent use
of bronchodilator therapies. None of these therapies have yet been
shown to prevent progression of airway remodeling or the more
rapid decline in lung function that can occur in a subset of asthma
patients.

