DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
■ APPROACH
A presumptive diagnosis of asthma can usually be made based on a
compatible history of recurrent wheezing, shortness of breath, chest
tightness, or cough related to common bronchoconstrictor
precipitants when appropriate components of the differential
diagnosis have been considered and/or eliminated. In some cases, a
therapeutic trial of low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) may be
considered. In all but the mildest cases, the diagnosis should be
confirmed with pulmonary function testing or demonstration of airway
hyperresponsiveness. Unfortunately, the diagnosis may be difficult to
confirm after initiation of therapy since airway obstruction and
hyperresponsiveness may be mitigated with therapy. A trial of
tapering medications may be necessary. Studies have shown that
more than one-third of patients with a physician diagnosis of asthma
do not meet the criteria for the diagnosis.
Adjunctive evaluation, as outlined below, should be undertaken to
identify precipitating factors and underlying mechanisms that may be
amenable to specific therapies (e.g., allergen avoidance). Cases that
require more than a daily moderate-dose ICS combined with a longacting β2-agonist (LABA) (together known as ICS/LABA) should
undergo more formal evaluation to assess comorbidities that may
make asthma difficult to control and a reassessment of any possible
confounding diagnoses that may mimic asthma symptoms (see
Table 287-3).
■ PRIMARY ASSESSMENT TOOLS FOR ESTABLISHING ADIAGNOSIS
History 
Patients with asthma most commonly complain of episodes
of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, mucus production,
or cough upon exposure to triggers listed in Table 287-2. Symptoms
may be worse on arising in the morning. Some may have nocturnal
symptoms alone. However, such patients should be evaluated for
postnasal drip or GERD if that is their sole presenting symptom.
Patients frequently complain of symptoms with rapid changes of
temperature or humidity. Exercise-induced symptoms are common
with increased sensitivity to cold air. As compared to cardiac sources
of dyspnea, exercise symptoms tend to develop more slowly after
initiation of exercise and tend to resolve more slowly unless a β2agonist is administered after the onset of symptoms. A careful
exposure history should be obtained for home (e.g., pets, molds,
dust, direct or secondhand smoke), work (work environment and
exposure to occupational sensitizers), and recreational (e.g.,
hobbies, recreational inhalants) exposures. Allergen-sensitized
patients may complain of symptoms on exposure to known allergens
such as animals and may complain of increased symptoms during
specific pollen seasons. Up to two-thirds of patients with asthma will
be atopic (as opposed to half of the U.S. population), and almost half
will have a history of rhinitis, with many complaining of intermittent
sinusitis. In patients with adult-onset asthma, a careful occupational
history should be obtained and a history of reactions to nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or use of new medications, such
as beta blockers (including ophthalmic preparations) and ACE
inhibitors (due to potential cough), should be elicited.

Physical Examination 
In between acute attacks, physical findings
may be normal. Many patients will have evidence of allergic rhinitis
with pale nasal mucus membranes. Five percent or more of patients
may have nasal polyps, with increased frequency in those with more
severe asthma and aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Some
patients will have wheezing on expiration (less so on inspiration).
During an acute asthma attack, patients present with tachypnea and
tachycardia, and use of accessory muscles can be observed.
Wheezing, with a prolonged expiratory phase, is common during
attacks, but as the severity of airway obstruction progresses, the
chest may become “silent” with loss of breath sounds.

Pulmonary Function Tests 
Effective reduction of the airway lumen
in asthma produces increased resistance to airflow, which can be
detected as a reduction in expiratory airflow during forced expiratory
maneuvers. The peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1), and the FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio
are reduced below the lower limit of normal. The flow-volume loop
may show a characteristic scalloping (see Chap. 286). These
findings may not be present during acute attacks or on therapy
(especially after recent use of bronchodilators). Reversibility is
defined as a ≥12% increase in the FEV1 and an absolute increase of
≥200 mL at least 15 min after administration of a β2-agonist or after
several weeks of corticosteroid therapy. Diurnal peak flow variability
of >20% has also been proposed as an indicator of reversible
airways disease, but it is less reliable due to difficulties with quality
control and variability of home assessments. Lung volumes and
diffusing capacity should be normal in uncomplicated asthma.
Assessment of Airway Responsiveness 
In cases where
pulmonary function tests are nonconfirmatory and the diagnosis
remains in doubt, testing to demonstrate increased reactivity to
provocative stimuli in the laboratory can be undertaken.
Methacholine, a cholinergic agonist, inhaled in increasing
concentrations is most commonly used. A provocative dose
producing a 20% drop in FEV1 (PD20) is calculated, with a value
≤400 μg indicative of airway reactivity. Mannitol is used as well, and
occasionally, hypertonic saline may be used. Challenge with
exercise and/or cold, dry air can be performed, with a positive
response recorded if there is a ≥10% drop in FEV1 from baseline. In
the case of suspected environmental/occupational exposures,
specific allergen challenges may be undertaken in highly specialized
labs.

■ ADJUNCTIVE ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Eosinophil Counts 
A large proportion of asthma patients not
treated with oral or high-dose ICSs will have eosinophil counts ≥300
cells/μL. Eosinophil counts correlate with severity of disease in
population studies. Their presence in patients with severe asthma
indicates a likelihood that the patient would respond to medications
targeted at type 2 inflammation. Extremely elevated levels should
prompt consideration of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
or primary eosinophilic disorders.

IgE, Skin Tests, and Radioallergosorbent Tests Total serum IgE
levels are useful in considering whether patients with severe asthma
would be eligible for anti-IgE therapy. Levels >1000 IU/mL should
prompt consideration of ABPA. Skin tests, or their in vitro
counterparts that detect IgE directed at specific antigens
(radioallergosorbent test [RAST]), can be useful in confirming atopy
and suggesting allergic rhinitis, which can complicate asthma
management. Allergy investigations may be useful, when correlated
with a history of reactions, in identifying environmental exposures
that may be aggravating asthma.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide Fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) in
exhaled breath is an approximate indicator of eosinophilic
inflammation in the airways. It is easily suppressed by ICSs and,
thus, can be used to assess adherence in patients in whom it was
initially elevated. Elevated levels (>35–40 ppb) in untreated patients
are indicative of eosinophilic inflammation. Levels >20–25 ppb in
patients with severe asthma on moderate- to high-dose ICS indicate
either poor adherence or persistent type 2 inflammation despite
therapy.

■ ADDITIONAL EVALUATION IN SEVERE/POORLY RESPONSIVE ASTHMA
In patients with poorly responsive asthma, additional evaluations for
comorbidities (see Table 287-3) may be necessary, including sinus
radiographic studies (even in those who have no symptoms of sinus
disease) and esophageal studies in those who have symptoms of
reflux. In patients with nonreversible disease, many obtain a serum
α1 antitrypsin level. Additionally, the following evaluations may be of
utility in poorly responsive asthma.

Chest Radiography 
Chest CT can be useful to assess for the
presence of bronchiectasis and other structural abnormalities that
could produce airway obstruction. New image analysis tools are
being used in the research setting to assess airway properties such
as airway wall thickness, airway diameter, and evidence of air
trapping.

Sputum 
Induced sputum may be used in more specialized centers
to help characterize type 2 and non–type 2 inflammation by detection
of eosinophils and neutrophils, respectively. In severe asthma, there
is some evidence that some patients may have localized persistent
eosinophilic airway inflammation despite lack of peripheral
eosinophils on blood analysis.

TREATMENT

Asthma
GOALS OF ASTHMA THERAPY AND ASSESSMENT OF CONTROL
Goals of asthma therapy in terms of achieving control of symptoms
and reducing risk (as reflected in frequency of asthma
exacerbations) are listed in Table 287-4. The therapeutic agents
used in treatment are discussed below, and an integrated approach
to care is discussed subsequently.

A comprehensive treatment approach involves avoiding and
reducing asthma triggers and, if necessary, the adjunctive use of
medications. Asthma medications are primarily divided into those
that relax smooth muscle and produce a fairly rapid relief of acute
symptoms and those that target inflammation or mediator
production. The former medications are commonly referred to as
reliever medications, and the latter are known as controller
medications.

REDUCING TRIGGERS
Mitigation 
As shown in Tables 287-1 and 287-2, triggers and
exposures can cause asthma and make it difficult to control. In the
case of those with occupational exposures, removal from the
offending environment may sometimes result in complete resolution
of symptoms or significant improvement. Secondhand smoke
exposure and frequent exposure to combustion products of
cannabis are remediable environmental exposures as well. The
removal of pets that are clearly associated with symptoms can
reduce symptoms. Pest control at home and in the school in those
with evidence of IgE-mediated sensitivity (skin test or IgE RAST)
may also be beneficial. The effect of dust or mold control in
reducing asthma symptoms has been more variable. There is
moderate evidence that dust control (impermeable mattress and
pillowcase covers) in those patients with symptoms and
sensitization may be effective in reducing symptoms only when
conducted as part of a comprehensive allergen mitigation strategy.

Allergen Immunotherapy 
Allergen immunotherapy reduces IgEmediated reactions to the allergens administered. It clearly reduces
the symptoms of allergic rhinitis and thus may be helpful in reducing
this comorbidity. The evidence for its effectiveness in isolated
asthma in those who are sensitized and have clinical symptoms is
variable. Due to the risk of anaphylaxis, guidelines generally
recommend immunotherapy only in patients whose asthma is under
control and who have mild to moderate asthma. The evidence base
for the effectiveness of sublingual allergen immunotherapy in the
treatment of asthma is not substantial.

Vaccination 
Respiratory infections are a major cause of asthma
exacerbations. Patients with asthma are strongly advised to receive
both types of currently available pneumococcal vaccines and yearly
influenza vaccines. COVID-19 vaccination is advised, as well.

MEDICATIONS
Bronchodilators 
Bronchodilators relax airway smooth muscle.
There are three major classes of bronchodilators, β2-agonists,
anticholinergics, and theophylline.

β2-Agonists 
Available in inhaled or oral form, these agents
activate β2-receptors present on airway smooth muscle. Such
receptors are also present on mast cells, but they contribute little to
the efficacy of these agents in asthma. β2-receptors are G protein–
coupled receptors that activate adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic
AMP, which results in relaxation of smooth muscle.

Use 
β2-Agonists are primarily used in inhaled forms to provide
relief of bronchospasm or to reduce the degree of bronchospasm
anticipated in response to exercise or other provocative stimuli.
Regular use has been associated with tachyphylaxis of the
bronchoprotective effect and possible increased airway reactivity.
This may be more common in patients with a polymorphism at the
16th amino acid position of the β2-receptor. Frequent short-acting
β-2 agonist use has been associated with increased asthma
mortality resulting in decreased enthusiasm for use in isolation
without inhaled corticosteroids.

Short-Acting β2-Agonists 
Albuterol (also known as salbutamol) is
the most commonly used agent. Bronchodilation begins within 3–5
min of inhalation, and effects generally last 4–6 h. It is most
commonly administered by metered-dose inhaler. Solutions for
nebulization are also used, especially for relief of bronchospasm in
children. Oral forms are available but are not commonly used.

Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
Salmeterol and formoterol are the two
available LABAs. They have an ∼12-h duration of action.
Formoterol has a quick onset comparable to the short-acting β2agonists. Salmeterol has a slower onset of action. These agents
can be used for prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm. In
contrast to their use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), these agents are not recommended for use as
monotherapy in the treatment of asthma. Their use in asthma is
generally restricted to use in combination with an ICS.

Ultra-Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
These agents (indacaterol,
olodaterol, and vilanterol) have a 24-h effect. They are only used in
combination with ICSs in the treatment of asthma.

Safety 
β2-Agonists are fairly specific for the β2-receptors, but in
some patients and especially at higher doses, they can produce
tremor, tachycardia, palpitations, and hypertension. They promote
potassium reentry into cells, and at high doses, they can produce
hypokalemia. Type B (nonhypoxic) lactic acidosis can also occur
and is thought to be secondary to increased glycogenolysis and
glycolysis and increased lipolysis, leading to a rise in fatty acid
levels, which can inhibit conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-coenzyme A.
Increased asthma mortality was associated with high-potency
β2-agonists in Australia and New Zealand. Increased use of β2agonists for relief of bronchospasm is a clear marker of poor
asthma control and has been associated with increased mortality.
Questions had been raised as to whether adding LABAs to ICS
might be associated with severe adverse asthma outcomes, but
several studies have not detected such outcomes in comparison to
maintaining the ICS dose.

Anticholinergics 
Cholinergic nerve–induced smooth-muscle
constriction plays a role in asthmatic bronchospasm. Anticholinergic
medications can produce smooth-muscle relaxation by antagonizing
this mechanism of airway narrowing. Agents that have been
developed for asthma have been pharmacologically designed to be
less systemically absorbed so as to minimize their systemic
anticholinergic effects. The long-acting agents in this class are
known as long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs).

Use 
The short-acting agents in this class can be used alone for
acute bronchodilation. They appear to be somewhat less effective
than β2-agonists and have a slower onset of action as well.

Safety 
Dry mouth may occur. At higher doses and in the elderly,
acute glaucoma and urinary retention have been reported. There
was a numerical (but not significant) difference in mortality in
African Americans treated with ICS/LAMA versus ICS/LABA for
asthma.

Theophylline 
Theophylline, an oral compound that increases
cyclic AMP levels by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, is now rarely
used for asthma due to its narrow therapeutic window, drug-drug
interactions, and reduced bronchodilation as compared to other
agents.

Controller (Anti-Inflammatory/Antimediator) Therapies 
Socalled “controller” therapies reduce asthma exacerbations and
improve long-term control, decreasing the need for intermittent use
of bronchodilator therapies. None of these therapies have yet been
shown to prevent progression of airway remodeling or the more
rapid decline in lung function that can occur in a subset of asthma
patients.

Corticosteroids 
Corticosteroids are particularly effective in
reducing type 2 inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness.
Corticosteroids bind to a cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor to form
a complex that translocates to the nucleus. The complex binds to
positive and negative response elements that result in inhibition of
T-cell activation; eosinophil function, migration, and proliferation;
and proinflammatory cytokine elaboration and activation of nuclear
factor-κB. It also attaches to other transcription factors, resulting in
deactivation of other proinflammatory pathways.

Use 
Corticosteroids reduce airway hyperresponsiveness, improve
airway function, prevent asthma exacerbations, and improve
asthma symptoms. Corticosteroid use by inhalation (ICSs)
minimizes systemic toxicity and represents a cornerstone of asthma
treatment.

ICS and ICS/LABA 
ICSs are the cornerstone of asthma therapy.
They take advantage of the pleiotropic effects of corticosteroids to
produce salutary impact at levels of systemic effect considerably
lower than oral corticosteroids. Their use is associated with
decreased asthma mortality. They are generally used regularly
twice a day as first-line therapy for all forms of persistent asthma.
Doses are increased, and they are combined with LABAs to control
asthma of increasing severity. European guidelines now
recommend their intermittent use even in intermittent asthma.
Combining them with LABAs permits effective control at lower ICS
dose. Longer-acting preparations permitting once-a-day use are
available. Their effects can be noticeable in several days, but
continued improvement may occur over months of therapy, with the
majority of improvement evident within the first month of regular
use. Adherence to regular therapy is generally poor, with as few as
25% of total annual prescriptions being refilled. Very high doses are
sometimes used to reduce oral corticosteroid requirements. Not all
patients respond to ICS. Increasing evidence suggests that the
most responsive patients are those with significant type 2–mediated
asthma.

Oral Corticosteroids 
Chronic oral corticosteroids (OCSs) at the
lowest doses possible (due to side effects) are used in patients who
cannot achieve acceptable asthma control without them. Alternateday dosing may be preferred, and pneumocystis pneumonia
prophylaxis should be administered for those maintained on a daily
prednisone dose of ≥20 mg. OCSs are also used to treat asthma
exacerbations, frequently at a dose of 40–60 mg/d of prednisone or
equivalent for 1–2 weeks. Since they are well absorbed, they may
also be used for managing hospitalized patients.

Intravenous Corticosteroids 
Intravenous preparations are
frequently used in hospitalized patients. Patients are rapidly
transitioned to OCS once their condition has stabilized.

Intramuscular Corticosteroids 
In high-risk, poorly adherent
patients, intramuscular triamcinolone acetonide has been used to
achieve asthma control and reduce exacerbations.

Safety 
Chronic administration of systemic corticosteroids is
associated with a plethora of side effects including diabetes,
osteoporosis, cataracts and glaucoma, bruising, weight gain, truncal
obesity, hypertension, ulcers, depression, and accelerated cardiac
risk, among others. Appropriate monitoring and infectious
(pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis for those treated chronically
with ≥20 mg prednisone/d) and bone health prophylaxis are
necessary. Intermittent “bursts” of systemic corticosteroids to treat
asthma exacerbations are associated with reduced side effects, but
observational studies have suggested that the cumulative dose over
time is associated with deleterious side effects.
ICSs have dramatically reduced side effects as compared to
OCSs. At higher doses, bruising occurs and osteoporosis can
accelerate. There is a small increase in glaucoma and cataracts.
Local effects include thrush, which can be reduced by use of a
spacer and gargling. Hoarseness may be the result of a direct
myopathic effect on the vocal cords. Rare patients exhibit side
effects even at moderate doses of ICS. Children may experience
growth suppression.

Leukotriene Modifiers 
Agents that inhibit production of
leukotrienes (zileuton, an inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase) or the action
of leukotrienes at the CysLT1 receptor (montelukast and zafirlukast)
are moderately effective in asthma.
They can improve airway function and reduce exacerbations but
not to the same degree as bronchodilators or ICS, respectively.
They are also effective in reducing symptoms of allergic rhinitis and,
thus, can be used in patients with concomitant allergic rhinitis.
Montelukast, in particular, is frequently used in children with mild
asthma due to concerns of ICS-related growth suppression.
Montelukast use may decrease due to safety warnings regarding
depression with this compound. Leukotriene modifiers are effective
in preventing exercise-induced bronchoconstriction without the
tachyphylactic effects that occur with regular use of LABAs.
Leukotriene modifiers are particularly effective in aspirinexacerbated respiratory disease, which is characterized by
significant leukotriene overproduction. They have also shown
modest effect as add-on therapy in patients poorly controlled on
high-dose ICS/LABA.

CysLT1 Antagonists 
Montelukast and zafirlukast are administered
orally once or twice daily, respectively. The onset of effect is rapid
(hours), with the majority of chronic effectiveness seen within 1
month.

5-Lipoxygenase Inhibition 
Zileuton in its extended form is
administered orally twice a day.

Safety 
Montelukast is well tolerated, but an association with
suicidal ideation has now resulted in a warning label from the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Zileuton increases liver function
tests (transaminases) in 3% of patients. Intermittent monitoring is
suggested. It inhibits CYP1A2, and appropriate dose adjustments of
concomitant medications may be necessary.

Cromolyn Sodium 
Cromolyn sodium is an inhaled agent believed
to stabilize mast cells. It is only available by nebulization and must
be administered two to four times a day. It is mildly to modestly
effective and appears to be helpful for exercise-induced
bronchospasm. It is used primarily in pediatrics in those concerned
about ICS side effects.

Anti-IgE 
Omalizumab, a monoclonal antibody to the Fc portion of
the IgE molecule, prevents the binding of IgE to mast cells and
basophils. Reduction in free IgE that can bind to effector cells
blocks antigen-related signaling, which is responsible for production
or release of many of the mediators and cytokines critical to asthma
pathobiology. In addition, through feedback mechanisms, reduction
in IgE production occurs as well. Anti-IgE has been shown to
increase interferon production in rhinovirus infections, decrease
viral-induced asthma exacerbations, and reduce duration and peak
viral shedding. This effect is believed to be due to IgE’s ability to
reduce interferon γ production in response to viral infections.

Use 
In asthma, anti-IgE has been tested in patients with a
circulating IgE ≥30 IU/mL and a positive skin test or RAST to a
perennial allergen. It is generally used in patients not responsive to
moderate- to high-dose ICS/LABA. It reduces exacerbations by 25–
50% and can reduce asthma symptoms but has minimal effect on
lung function. Anti-IgE is dosed based on body weight and
circulating IgE and is administered subcutaneously every 2–4
weeks depending on the calculated dose. In the United States, the
maximum dose is 300 mg every 2 weeks, which generally restricts
the drug to those with a body weight ≤150 kg. Most effects are
generally seen in 3–6 months. Retrospective studies have
suggested that patients with an exhaled nitric oxide approximately
≥20 ppb or circulating eosinophils ≥260/μL have the greatest
response as ascertained by reduction in exacerbations. FeNO is
slightly reduced by treatment, but circulating IgE, as measured by
available clinical tests, is not affected since these tests measure
total circulating IgE, not free IgE.

Safety 
The incidence of side effects is low. Anaphylaxis has been
reported in 0.2% of patients receiving the drug.

IL-5–Active Drugs 
Mepolizumab and reslizumab are monoclonal
antibodies that bind to IL-5, and benralizumab binds to the IL-5
receptor. They rapidly (within a day) reduce circulating eosinophils.

Use 
In patients symptomatic on moderate- to high-dose
ICS/LABA, generally with two or more exacerbations that require
OCS per year and with an eosinophil count of ≥300/μL, IL-5–active
drugs reduce exacerbations by about half or more. FEV1 and
symptoms improve moderately as well. In patients who are not on
chronic OCSs, these drugs are less effective in those with
eosinophil counts <300/μL. They are also effective in reducing the
need for chronic OCSs regardless of circulating eosinophil count
(presumably due to the fact that many of those patients have type 2
inflammation but their circulating eosinophils have been suppressed
by the systemic OCS). FeNO and IgE are relatively unaffected by
these drugs. Most clinical effects are usually seen within 3–6
months.

Safety 
These drugs are associated with minimal side effects.
Mepolizumab and benralizumab are approved for home
administration.

Anti–IL-4/13 
The IL-4 and IL-13 receptors are heterodimers that
share a common subunit, IL-4 receptor α. Dupilumab binds to this
subunit and, thus, blocks signaling through both receptors.

Use 
In addition to effectiveness in the phenotype of patients who
respond to anti–IL-5 therapies, poorly controlled patients on
moderate- to high-dose ICS/LABA with an FeNO of 20–25 ppb also
appear to respond to dupilumab even if their peripheral eosinophils
are not elevated. Dupilumab reduces exacerbations by ≥50%,
decreases symptoms, and may produce more of an effect on FEV1
than anti–IL-5 drugs. It gradually reduces FeNO and IgE levels.
Paradoxically, circulating eosinophil counts may initially temporarily
increase. Most effects are seen by 3–6 months of therapy.

Safety 
Side effects are minimal but cases of serious systemic
eosinophilia associated with the reduction of oral corticosteroids
have been noted. This drug is also approved for home
administration and is also approved for atopic dermatitis.

Bronchial Thermoplasty, Alternative Therapies, and Therapies
Under Development • Bronchial Thermoplasty 
This procedure
involves radiofrequency ablation of the airway smooth muscle in the
major airways administered through a series of three
bronchoscopies for patients with severe asthma. There is some
evidence that it may reduce exacerbations in very select patients.
The procedure may be accompanied by significant morbidity, and
most guidelines do not recommend it other than in the context of
clinical trials or registries.

Alternative Therapies 
Alternative therapies such as acupuncture
and yoga have not been shown to improve asthma in controlled
trials. Studies with placebo have demonstrated that there may be a
significant response to placebo.

Therapies in Development Trials are underway targeting
pathways and receptors shown in Fig. 287-3. Those in more
advanced stages of development include therapies targeting TSLP,
IL-33, and CRTH2. Studies targeting IL-17 and TNF-α have not
shown efficacy, but it is unclear if they were appropriately targeted.
Whether these interventions might prove useful for particular
endotypes of asthma is unclear. Proof-of-concept studies targeting
mast cells via inhibition of tyrosine kinase have suggested efficacy
in severe asthma.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT

Asthma
U.S. (National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
[NAEPP]) and World Health Organization (Global Initiative for
Asthma [GINA]) guidelines advise a symptomatic approach to
asthma treatment assuming that appropriate measures have been
taken to address asthma triggers, exposures, and comorbidities
enumerated in Tables 287-2 and 287-3. Additionally, adherence
and inhaler techniques need to be addressed. Poor adherence or
poor inhaler technique has been identified as the cause of poor
asthma control in up to 50% of patients referred for poorly
controlled asthma.
The stepwise approach to intensifying and reducing asthma
therapy is outlined in Table 287-5. It involves “stepping” therapy
up or down based on assessment of whether asthma is controlled
by the criteria listed in Table 287-4. Assuming comorbidities have
been addressed, adherence has been evaluated, education
regarding avoiding triggers has been performed, and inhaler
technique is verified, the cornerstone of preferred therapy is the
intensification of ICS therapy in conjunction with the use of a LABA
to achieve greater control at lower ICS doses.
A major change in the stepwise approach, advocated for more
than two decades, has occurred. Evidence has accumulated that
as-needed ICS can be used instead of regular ICS in milder
asthma and that the trigger for such use could be patient
perception of the need to use a reliever inhaler. Since formoterol is
a LABA with a rapid onset, combination ICS/formoterol has been
used as a single agent in multiple studies: as needed without
background therapy in milder asthma, and as needed in addition
to twice daily ICS/formoterol in more severe asthma. Since asthma
mortality can occur even in mild asthma (albeit at lower rates than
more severe asthma), GINA, as part of a comprehensive strategy
of asthma management, recommends ICS/formoterol be used as
the reliever in all steps of asthma severity, including intermittent
asthma (Step 1). NAEPP guidelines utilizing evidence-based
studies recommend that ICS/formoterol be used as the reliever
medication in patients requiring step 3 and 4 therapy (see Table
287-5) and that as-needed concomitant ICS and short-acting βagonist (SABA) can be used as a therapy in step 2. For the sake
of simplicity, an adapted GINA approach is outlined in Table 287-5
with footnotes identifying the major differences from the NAEPP.
Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) are alternative
medications in step 2, which may be used in those concerned
about the minimal ICS side effects. However, recent warnings
about suicidal ideation associated with montelukast may make this
approach less appealing. Leukotriene modifiers and long-acting
anticholinergics are possible add-on (adjunctive) therapies in
those requiring step 4 and/or 5 therapies. Biologics are incredibly
effective in their specific endotypes (type 2 with exacerbations and
specific biomarkers, as previously described), but their high cost
currently relegates them to step 5 therapy or beyond.

TREATMENT
Asthma Attacks
Asthma deteriorations of mild to moderate severity can be initially
treated with a β2-agonist administered up to every 1 h. Increasing
the dose of ICSs by four- to fivefold may be helpful as well. If
patients fail to achieve adequate control and continue to require β2agonists hourly for several hours, they should be referred for urgent
care. In the urgent care setting, PEFR or FEV1 should be assessed,
and patients are usually treated with nebulized β2-agonists up to
every 20 min. Those with PEFR >60% of predicted will frequently
respond to β2-agonists alone. If they fail to respond in 1–2 h,
intravenous corticosteroids should be administered. Supplemental
oxygen is usually administered to correct hypoxemia. An LTRA and
magnesium are sometimes given as well. Nebulized
anticholinergics can be administered to produce additional
bronchodilation. Failure to achieve PEFR >60% or persistent severe
tachypnea over 4–6 h should prompt consideration of admission to
the hospital. In-hospital treatment may include continuous
bronchodilator nebulization. Noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation to assist with respiratory exhaustion is sometimes used
to prevent a need for intubation, and helium-oxygen mixtures may
be used to decrease the work of breathing. Antibiotics should be
administered only if there are signs of infection.

Mechanical ventilation may be difficult in patients with status
asthmaticus due to high positive pressures in the setting of high
resistance to airflow due to airway obstruction. Most patients with
asthma attacks present with hypocapnia due to a high respiratory
rate. Normal or near-normal PCO2 in a patient with asthma in
respiratory distress should raise concerns of impending respiratory
failure and need for mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation
should aim for low respiratory rates and/or ventilation volumes to
decrease peak airway pressures. This can frequently be achieved
by “permissive hypercapnia”—allowing the PCO2 to rise and, if
necessary, temporarily correcting critical acidosis with
administration of fluids to increase the pH. Neuromuscular paralysis
may sometimes be beneficial. Bronchoscopy to clear mucus plugs
has been described but may be dangerous in the setting of
difficulties with mechanical ventilation.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ HIGH-RISK ASTHMA PATIENTS
Three to four thousand people die from asthma in the United States
each year. Table 287-6 lists characteristics of patients at high risk for
asthma death. These characteristics should be considered in
evaluating and treating patients who present with asthma.


■ EXERCISE-INDUCED SYMPTOMS
In many cases, the degree of exercise intolerance may reflect poor
asthma control. Treatment involves step therapy of asthma as
outlined in Table 287-5. In other cases, however, asthma may be
well controlled in all other respects, but patients may report that they
cannot undertake the level of exercise they desire. Some increase in
exercise capacity can be achieved by starting at lower levels of
exercise (warming up) and by using a mask in colder weather to
condition the air. Pretreatment with an SABA can increase the
threshold of ventilation required to induce bronchoconstriction.
LABAs may extend the period of protection, but their use alone in
asthma is to be discouraged. For occasional exercise, ICS/LABA can
be used, but regular use may expose the patient to unnecessary
doses of ICS. If regular exercise is undertaken, then LTRAs may
provide protection and can be used regularly. A SABA (or
ICS/formoterol) should always be available for quick relief.
Exercise-induced airway narrowing in elite athletes may be
related to direct epithelial injury. In addition to the above,
conditioning of incoming air may be of major assistance. Ipratropium
has been reported to be of utility as well.
■ PREGNANCY
Asthma may improve, deteriorate, or remain unchanged during
pregnancy. Poor asthma control, especially exacerbations, is
associated with poor fetal outcomes. The general principles of
asthma management and its goals are unchanged. Avoidance of
triggers, especially smoking environments, is critical in view of the
risk of loss of control and, in the case of smoking, its clear effects on
risk of development of asthma in the child. There is extensive
experience suggesting the safety of inhaled albuterol,
beclomethasone, budesonide, and fluticasone, with reassuring
information on formoterol and salmeterol in pregnancy. Animal
studies have not suggested toxicity for montelukast, zafirlukast,
omalizumab, and ipratropium. Antibodies cross the placenta, and
there are few human data on the safety of IL-5–active drugs or anti–
IL-4Rα. Chronic use of OCS has been associated with neonatal
adrenal insufficiency, preeclampsia, low birth weight, and a slight

increase in the frequency of cleft palate. However, it is clear that
poorly controlled asthma during pregnancy carries greater risk to the
fetus and mother than these effects. There should be no hesitancy in
administering routine pharmacotherapy for acute exacerbations.
Initiation of allergen immunotherapy or omalizumab during
pregnancy is not recommended. In cases where prostaglandins are
needed to manage pregnancy, PGF2-α should be avoided since it is
associated with bronchoconstriction.
■ ASPIRIN-EXACERBATED RESPIRATORY DISEASE
A subset of patients (5–10%) present in adulthood with difficult-tocontrol asthma and type 2 inflammation with eosinophilia, sinusitis,
nasal polyposis, and severe asthma exacerbations that are
precipitated by ingesting inhibitors of cyclooxygenase, with aspirin
being the most prominent of such inhibitors. Such patients, classified
as having aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease, overproduce
leukotrienes in response to inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1, probably
secondary to inhibition of PGE2. These patients should avoid
inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-1, (aspirin and NSAIDs) but can
generally tolerate inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2 and
acetaminophen. They should be treated with leukotriene modifiers.
Aspirin desensitization can be undertaken to decrease upper
respiratory symptoms and to allow chronic administration of aspirin
or NSAIDs for those that require it. Dupilumab and the IL-5–active
biologics appear to be particularly helpful and appear to be
superseding aspirin desensitization in management except when
chronic administration of aspirin or NSAIDs is required for another
therapeutic indication.
■ SEVERE ASTHMA
Severe and difficult-to-treat asthma, which composes ∼5–10% of
asthma, is defined as asthma that, having undergone appropriate
evaluation for comorbidities and mimics, education, and trigger
mitigation, remains uncontrolled on step 5 therapy or requires step 5
therapy for its control. Severe asthma can account for almost 50% of
the cost of asthma care in the United States. A significant proportion

of these patients have trouble with adherence and/or inhaler
technique, and these factors need to be investigated vigorously.
Almost half of these patients have evidence of persistent eosinophilic
inflammation as evidenced by peripheral blood eosinophils and/or
induced sputum. Those with recurrent exacerbations have a
substantially increased likelihood of responding to the type 2
targeted biologics. Treatment for those with mixed inflammation,
isolated neutrophilic inflammation, or pauci-granulocytic inflammation
remains to be determined. Some data suggest that many of these
patients may have aberrations in the pathways responsible for
resolution of inflammation. A rare patient may have biochemical
abnormalities that interfere with steroid response pathways.
Macrolides are of use in a subset. Studies targeting mast cells, IL-6,
IL-33, and other pathways illustrated in Fig. 287-3 are underway.
Therapies aimed at improving pro-resolving pathways may also be
promising.
■ ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH ASTHMA
Asthma may present at or persist into older age. The mortality of
asthma in those >65 years old is five times greater than that of
younger cohorts even when adjusting for comorbidities. Many of
these patients had asthma as children, some with quiescent periods
as they entered adulthood. Of those with new-onset asthma, almost
half were smokers or are currently smoking. One-quarter of adultonset asthma is believed to be due to occupational exposure.
Patients presenting with eosinophilic inflammation appear to have
more severe asthma. Besides investigations of comorbidities, these
patients may require adjustment to step therapy based on
intolerance of β2-agonist therapy due to arrhythmia or
tremulousness. The coexistence of COPD needs to be carefully
considered (see below).
■ ASTHMA-COPD OVERLAP
Most clinicians agree that asthma-COPD overlap is not a syndrome,
but rather recognize that it may be useful to identify patients who
present with symptoms related to airway dysfunction that may be

due to simultaneous coexistence of both asthma and COPD. From
an asthma perspective, recognition that COPD and smoking can
alter the response to asthma therapies may be important. Smoking
can blunt the response to ICS. Further, it has been difficult to
demonstrate the effectiveness of biologic agents targeted at type 2
inflammation in patients with COPD despite the presence of ≥300
circulating eosinophils/μL. Additionally, in patients with both
diseases, earlier initiation of anticholinergics may be considered.
